---
layout: post
title: "Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Maths
tags:
  - sampling 
  - stability
  - vocabulary 
---



<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

[Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0slziGiwZOg) is a fundamental bridge between continuous-time signals 
(often called "analog signals") and discrete-time signals (often called "digital signals"). 
It establishes a sufficient condition for a sample rate that permits a discrete sequence of samples 
to capture all the information from a continuous-time signal of finite bandwidth.

__In order to reconstruct a signal, sample at a rate greater than twice it's highest frequency component__

<!--more-->

##### Application: 

Similar to one-dimensional discrete-time signals, images can also suffer from aliasing if the sampling 
resolution, or pixel density, is inadequate. For example, a digital photograph of a striped shirt with 
high frequencies (in other words, the distance between the stripes is small), can cause aliasing of the 
shirt when it is sampled by the camera's image sensor. The aliasing appears as a [moiré pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moir%C3%A9_pattern). 
The "solution" to higher sampling in the spatial domain for this case would be to move closer to the shirt,
use a higher resolution sensor, or to optically blur the image before acquiring it with the sensor.

##### Offtop:

[MIT: Nyquist plot and Nyquist Stability Theorem in OC](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics-and-astronautics/16-323-principles-of-optimal-control-spring-2008/lecture-notes/lec6.pdf)

In control theory and stability theory, the Nyquist stability criterion,  is a graphical technique for 
determining the stability of a dynamical system. Because it only looks at the Nyquist plot of 
the open loop systems, it can be applied without explicitly computing the poles and zeros of 
either the closed-loop or open-loop system (although the number of each type of right-half-plane 
singularities must be known). As a result, it can be applied to systems defined by non-rational 
functions, such as systems with delays. In contrast to Bode plots, it can handle transfer functions 
with right half-plane singularities. In addition, there is a natural generalization to more 
complex systems with multiple inputs and multiple outputs, such as control systems for airplanes.


